# Finite Automata

A finite automaton (FA) is a mathematical model of computation that consists of a finite set of states, an initial state, a set of final or accepting states, and a set of transition functions.
It is used to recognize patterns within input strings, and can be used to implement simple algorithms or solve problems in the theory of computation.
Finite automata are a fundamental concept in the theory of computation and are the basis for more complex models such as pushdown automata and Turing machines.

## Finite Automaton

A finite automaton (FA) is a 5-tuple (Q, Σ, δ, q0, F) where:

1. Q is a finite set called the **states**
2. Σ is a finite set of input symbols called the **alphabet**
3. δ is a **transition function**. Q × Σ → Q is a mapping from a state and an input symbol to a state.
4. q0 ∈ Q is the **initial state**.
5. F ⊆ Q is a set of **final states** or **accepting states**

### Finite Automaton Representation

The state transitions can be represented in a table called a **transition table**.
It is a mapping from a state and an input symbol to a state.

For a given automaton $M = (Q, Σ, δ, q_0, F)$,
with $Q = \{q_1, q_2, q_3\}, \text{ and } \Sigma = \{0, 1\}$,

$\delta$ can be written as:

| q\*    | 0     | 1     |
| ------ | ----- | ----- |
| $q_1$  | $q_1$ | $q_2$ |
| $q_2$  | $q_3$ | $q_2$ |
| $q_3$  | $q_2$ | $q_2$ |

where $q_1$ is the start state
and $F = q_2$ is the final state.

#### Finite Automaton Set Notation

The transition function can also be written in set notation:

$\delta = \{((q_1, 0), q_1), ((q_1, 1), q_1), ((q_2, 0), q_3), ((q_2, 1), q_2), ((q_3, 0), q_2), ((q_3, 1), q_2)\}$

## Deterministic Finite Automaton

**Determinism** is defined as any current states is perfectly defined by previous states and a sequence of previous causes.
Therefore, given some initial state and subsequent actions (causes), we can exactly predict any future state of the system.

A **Deterministic Finite Automaton (DFA)** is a finite automaton that has a unique transition for each state and input symbol.
This means that there is only one possible next state for a given current state and input symbol.

### Properties of DFA

1. Unique Transitions
   - In each state there can be only one possible transition per input symbol.
2. Complete Transitions
   - The transition function $\delta$ specifies exactly one next state for each possible combination of a state and an input symbol.
3. No $\epsilon$-Transitions
    - Transitions with an empty string $\epsilon$ are not allowed.

- It is possible to have 0 accept states.
- It is possible accept the empty string $\epsilon$ if the start state is an accept state.
- Recurrent transitions are allowed.

### Languages

Let $A$ be the set of all strings that a machine $M$ accepts.
Then $A$ is called the **language** of $M$: $L(M) = A$

$A = \{w | w \text{ contains at least one 1 and an even number of 0s followed by a 1}\}$

A language recognized by a DFA is called a **regular language**.

### Computation

For a given DFA $M = (Q, Σ, δ, q_0, F)$,
and a string $w = w_1w_2...w_n$ with $w_i \in Σ$,

$M$ accepts $w$ iff:

1. $r_0 = q_0$
2. $\delta(r_i, w_i) = r_{i+1}, \forall i \le n - 1$
3. $r_n \in F$

where $r_i$ is the state after reading $w_1...w_i$.

## Composing DFA's using Regular Operations

### Closure

A set is said to be **closed** under an operation if application of the operation yields a new element of the set.

- **Closure under union**: if $A_1$ and $A_2$ are regular languages, so is $A_1 \cup A_2$.
